okay Starlin welcome to IELTS reading
super skills this is the third one we've
done this quarter and my name is Jay and
I will eat ooh language I'm one of the
expert teachers the first thing I want
to talk to you about is IELTS reading in
general it's all about finding needles
in haystacks what does that mean well
this is a saying in English where
something is incredibly hard to find
right it's all about finding key words
in paragraphs
that's what IELTS reading is about
finding a needle in a haystack so the
let's first think about synonyms because
one of the most critical skills that you
need to have or understand is synonyms a
synonym of course is a word that means
the same thing as another word like big
and large or small and tiny or hungry
and starving for example these are
synonyms words that mean the same thing
so let's do a little warm-up I just want
you to find the synonyms in this
paragraph please you have ten seconds
look into this passage and find the word
find the synonyms quite literally ten
seconds
cool alright it was have a joke actually
but this is basically what happens in
IELTS reading you have your question
over here and in the question will be a
key word right then you need to look at
the text or the passage you need to find
the corresponding key word in the text
and it will often be a synonym it more
often than not won't be the same word as
the question so here for example you
look in the kit you'll find the key word
here you look in the passage and you'll
find a synonym same thing here key word
synonym key word synonym this is the
essence of IELTS reading let's do a
little warm-up I want you to find the
synonyms in this text here so here are
the words you can imagine that these are
in the question and here is the passage
you need to go through and find the
different synonyms I'll give you a few
minutes to complete this one
[Music]
cool pop them into the chat as you go
go ahead khushboo well done please work
fast you're nearly quarter of the way
through your time already good Joe
Murray well done
keep going you halfway through your time
you should be it now up to number five
Gordana well done well done
Deepak now see if you can get three four
six and seven about 30 seconds left
khushboo check your number at leas and
on youtube well done my ARA looking good
and mum on
good Jerry
Matane has two parts what are the two
hearts understand signals and should be
a verb noun
cool well done that's probably enough
time that's the kind of pace that you
need to read so let's have a look here
are the key words and the questions
here's the passage what I'll do is they
give you the key word here and here
there is a synonym so let's go through
the answers so you can see what I mean
so understand imagine this is in the
question and it's asking you something
that understanding and here in the text
it says interpret so now you know where
to read and where to find the answer
understand interpret associating
attributing cognitive mental it's all
about synonyms empathizing with adopting
the perspectives of so here it's not
just a single word it's actually
multiple words that mean the same thing
feelings emotions find that's easy
that's just a noun and a noun goals
intentions the wild the animal kingdom
so you can imagine it's asking you
something in the question about the wild
and then in the passage it mentions
something about the animal kingdom show
demonstrate is looking at has an ion so
here we've got a phrase is looking at
and here we've got a very strange phrase
keep an eye on something or has an ion
so these mean the same things understand
signals interpret cues cool how did you
go let's have a look looking good
looking good well done right let's do
something a little bit different now
here's a phrase telling the difference
I'm gonna give you a whole paragraph
what you need to do is quickly scan your
eyes over the paragraph and keep this
keyword in your mind this phrase rather
telling the difference telling the
difference telling the difference then
you're going to look at the paragraph
and you're going to find the synonymous
phrase the corresponding phrase the
phrase that means the same thing
cool so start repeating this in your
mind telling the difference telling the
difference you got 20 seconds
telling the difference
ten seconds telling the difference
what's the synonym good you got it just
on time that's right maybe you needed
more than 20 seconds so let's have a
look
differentiate telling the difference or
differentiating these are synonyms let's
do another one I want you to find the
synonym for the word confused confused
confused if 20 seconds
ten seconds good khushboo well done good
Joe Murray got it three two one end so
you had to quickly read your eyes scan
your eyes over this paragraph saying
confused confused and fused confused
confused no no no no no perplexed
interesting
that's the synonym for the word confused
for the adjective confused these mean
same thinks let's do it again this time
take out a phrasal verb take out to take
something out to take something out take
out take out what's the synonym here
khushboo well done you got it good
Deepak I'm on got it as well well done
good good I'll give you another 10
seconds cool all right let's have a look
so take out take out take out take out
we're running our eyes over generate a
crucial to the encryption that protects
our privacy and security engaging in a
digital transaction could be it actually
I didn't see that transaction could be
take out because you well I'm not quite
what about withdrawing cash withdrawing
cash taking out cash withdrawing cash
these are the synonyms these mean the
same things this is the skill that you
need to develop if you want to get a
high IELTS reading score this is the
skill how do you develop this though
first of all you need to understand the
nature of synonyms you need to
understand that hat that in the question
is a key word in the passage is a
synonym but that's not it that's an
understanding of it what's the skill the
skill is that you actually have a big
enough vocabulary where you know that
take out and withdraw mean the same
thing you have a big enough vocabulary
that you know that confused and
perplexed I mean the same thing ok this
is what it's about
there's no trick to it really you need a
large vocabulary in order to do this
accurately and to do efficiently to do
it quickly they are the two real things
that you need to keep in mind while
doing IELTS reading is accuracy yes you
have to be accurate but you also have to
be efficient you can't be slow because
you would just simply run out of time so
accuracy and efficiency large vocabulary
your ability to spot synonyms is
critical but there's another skill so
the synonym one's important but there's
another one where you need to understand
or ask yourself what's the main idea
these are the two main skills first one
synonyms second one main ideas main
ideas so let's do a few little
activities here
I want you to scan read the paragraph
again to find the main idea okay run
your eyes across it read it very quickly
and pick out what is the central ire so
imagine if you took this paragraph and
you put it into a saucepan and you turn
on the oven the hot plate and you boiled
this paragraph down and what's left
would be the main idea so let's think
about this while looking at this one
here I want you to read this paragraph
and decide a B of C or D which is the
main idea
I'll give you another minute I want you
to double-check your answer think about
what the most important part of this
paragraph ears what's the scientific
breakthrough
so Deepak chick see I don't think it's
see 30 seconds left
I'm gonna give you a hint it's not Dee
it's not Dee
seconds good Bessel well done all right
let's stop there good I'm on confident
confident confident okay let's have a
look
salty foods make makes salty foods makes
you salty foods make you thirsty I'm
sorry my grammatical mistake they're
salty foods make you thirsty err again
my grammatical mistake salty foods make
you less thirsty
okay one salty foods make you thirsty a
more thirsty or less thirsty makes you
salty foods makes you make you energetic
salty foods are important on Mars hmm
well let's have a look we've all heard
that eating salty foods makes you
thirsty err but what sounds like good
nutritional advice turns out to be not
true so it's not a it's not a and this
is something you have to be careful of
in IELTS reading is deceptive sentences
so the first sentence looks like it's
true okay great I found it that was so
easy but then the second sentence will
contradict the first sentence and make
it untrue so you need to keep reading to
find the answer often what sounds like
good nutritional advice turns out to be
not true in the long run in a study
carried out during a simulated mission
to Mars an international group of
scientists has found exactly the
opposite to be true so salty foods make
you thirsty err the opposite is true
salty foods make you less thirsty the
answer is B and please forgive my
grammatical errors there I must have
copied and pasted from that sentence
there the answer is B salty foods make
you less thirsty interesting that was a
tough one let's do it a simpler one
what's the main idea the main idea
good much better-looking good this time
give you another 30 seconds for this one
10 seconds
cool
right let's have a look all right so if
we if we took this paragraph and we
boiled it down to find the main idea of
what would it be about would it be about
ocean litter is this about ocean litter
well it mentioned ocean litter what
about is it about the world's oceans is
that what it's about
or is about fuel from plastic or is
about mobile reactors let's have a look
so ocean litter billions of pounds of
plastic waste are littering the world's
oceans so it's got this one a and B in
the first sentence that this sentence is
the important one now an organic chemist
and a sail boat boat captain report that
they are developing a process to reuse
certain plastics transforming them from
worthless trash into a valuable diesel
fuel with a mobile reactor the answer is
C this is about making fuel from plastic
one more before we begin our mini mock
tests scan Mead to find the main idea
here we go
you
another 30 seconds
all right
take a look let's read this is it about
bed bug ancestors is it about the oldest
insects ever found is it about a very
special cave or is it about ancient
human activity so a cave in Oregon that
is the site of some of the oldest
preserved evidence of human activity in
North America was also once a home to
not too distant cousins of the common
bed bug archaeologists describe remains
of the common bed bug found in caves
near Paisley or Oregon that represent
the oldest specimens of insects from the
genus SIMEX ever found ranging between
five thousand one hundred and eleven
thousand years old
the answer is a this is about bed bug
ancestors not too distant cousins of the
common bed bug oldest specimens of
insects this is about Ben and esters of
bed bugs is it about the oldest insects
ever found no it doesn't mention that it
says it represents from the genus SIMEX
so they're the oldest ones from this
particular genus mentions this very
special cave but that's not what it's
about
and it mentions ancient human activity
but that's not what it's about
cool all right I know that was tough but
that's what it's all about it's about
synonyms and it's about main ideas and
also about understanding the IELTS
question types so what we're going to do
today is something a bit different I'm
going to give you a very simplified
IELTS question type just so you don't
have to struggle with the content of the
passage so you know how to answer the
question and once you understand it
conceptually then we're going to do a
more difficult one okay but before we do
that what I want you to do on a piece of
paper is just write down 1 2 3 down to
number 10 like this because this will be
our answer sheet and we'll use this for
all of the real questions we do so we're
going to simulate the IELTS reading exam
so please write that down I'll just give
you 20 seconds to do that
cool alright and we'll start off with
multiple-choice why because just about
every IELTS reading exam contains a
multiple-choice question they're
extremely common so let's do a really
simple one okay this is what the
question looks like on test and this is
why it's confusing this is a very very
simple passage so please read read the
question then read the passage then
answer the question
put the answer into the chat
so su rcord please check your number -
Donna check your number one khushboo you
might have to turn your phone screen if
you're watching this on your phone
good okay dead simple dead simple you
should have just got this immediately
first of all it says J has a red car he
bought his car off his uncle Tim for
$400 it rattles it smokes but it still
works
what color is Jay's car pink green red
or black
from whom did J purchase his car rattle
smoke J or Tim the answer of course is
red one C and 2 D Tim he bought it off
Tim fine now we understand how to do
this question so what you do is you
quickly well this is what I do you look
into the question you find the key word
like color for example then you look
into the paragraph and you see the word
red so you know what that's where you
should be reading here you're going to
be looking for a name
so you're look into the passage and you
find the name that's how you do this one
so let's do the multiple choice for real
with a complex paragraph I'm going to
give you a few minutes to do this
actually will give you quite a lot of
time I want you to get it right
concentrate on accuracy not so much on
efficiency
you
you hear one more minute
I see a lot of people writing for number
2 choosing deer doesn't meant measure
internet reliance here it says it's used
to measure excessive reliance on the
internet so the answer for 2 is not D so
I'll give you another 30 seconds please
check your number 2 it's not
D will also give you another hint
question 2 starts from starts from this
sentence here
you
cool alright let's take a look at the
answers here in fact let's first read
the question number one says what is the
main problem with the IAT or the
Internet addiction test what's the main
problem so as we saw before we're
looking for the main idea in the
paragraph is it a it relies on old data
is that the main problem or B it does
not utilize modern Internet tools or C
it's just outdated or D it has changed
significantly over time the answer is C
it's outdated and if you look at this
particular sentence it says the IAT was
developed in 1998 prior to the
widespread use of smartphone technology
in addition Internet use has changed
radically over the last 18 years
so one C is correct a B and D are not
right it just simply doesn't say that
what about not to one particular problem
with the IAT and now we're reading for
detail we're not reading for a main idea
a it may be overstating results B it's
not standardized C it was developed
prior to 1998 D it doesn't measure
Internet reliance let's have a look at B
first it's not standardized well here it
says the IAT is the standard test so
it's not be what about C it was
developed prior to 1998
it says the IAT was developed in 1998 so
it's not see what about D it doesn't
measure Internet reliance well it says
here it says it's used to measure
excessive reliance on the Internet so
it's not d the answer is a it may be
overstating results why showing up false
positives for people who were simply
using the internet rather than being
over reliant on it so for questions 1 &
2 you can write on your answer sheet C
and a and if you've got that please put
a smiley face into the chat I just want
to check good work Bastille and khushboo
well done they weren't particularly easy
questions good work
nice what about on YouTube how you're
going call and I run a got it as well
nice nice nice
right true false not given we're gonna
do this one every week
why because conceptually it's very
difficult it's a crazy question it's
hard to understand true and false is
easy to understand but not given is
something that you need to practice so
let's have a look at a very simple one
here so this time you'll be writing T F
or in G here it's the same paragraph as
we saw before says J has a red car he
bought it off his uncle Tim for $400 it
rattles and it smokes but it still works
number three says J owns a green car
this is true in which case it says the
same thing as the paragraph is it false
in which case it directly contradicts
what's in the paragraph or not given is
there just no information given about
this so we cannot know and we cannot
assume anything
so please do it three four and five
good okay let's have a look at the
answers this was of course dead simple
so answers J owns a green car is false
why because it directly contradicts this
first sentence that says J has a red car
James a green car J has a red car direct
contradiction must be false J's car is
old well it doesn't say anything about
that it mentions that it's red it
mentions that I bought it off my uncle
Tim for $400 it mentions that it rattles
and it smokes that still works but it
doesn't say anything about the age of
the car and we can't assume just because
it's red and then it was cheap and that
rattles in smoke it's old you can't
assume anything therefore it's not given
because there's just simply no
information on this and the last one
Jones a red car is true it says the
exact same thing in different words so
let's take that understanding and that
concept and apply it to some real
questions of difficulty we'll give you a
few minutes to do these funds
you
one moment
20 seconds
by another 30 seconds actually 30
seconds starts now
ten seconds please put in your answers
all right so we need to think about
whether these statements are true
whether they say the same thing as the
passage whether they're false whether
they directly contradict what's said in
the passage or whether there's just no
information and we can't assume anything
we can't read between the lines in which
case it'll be not given so number three
people who are visually creative suffer
more frequent nightmares well here it
says visually creative people fine
report disturbed sleep does that mean
nightmares not necessarily we can't
assume that disturbed sleep means
nightmares maybe they just wake up more
so the answer to this one is not given
it's not directly contradicting it's not
saying the same thing so it's not true
it's saying something else and we don't
know therefore it has to be not given
what about visually creative people
daydream more than normal people well it
says that visually creative people
report disturbed sleep leading to
difficulties in daytime functioning
maybe they daydream more it doesn't
directly nothing said here that
contradicts it and it doesn't say the
same thing we can't assume anything so
it's also going to be not given so three
and four are both not given what about
five it says verbally creative people
sleep longer than visually creative
people okay fine here it says in case of
verbally creative people they sleep more
hours more hours longer verbally
creative people sleep longer than
visually creative people true number six
visual and verbal creativity utilized
similar mental and physical workings
this is this final sentence here this
demonstrates that the expression of
visual creativity involves different
psychological mental biological physical
mechanisms
working there's a synonym that we learnt
before so this one is false the
expression of visual creative involves
different here it says similar so
there's there's the difference there's a
direct contradiction similar versus
different so if you had not given not
given true and false they are the
correct answers please put a smiley face
into the chat if you got that cool well
done khushboo excellent but still got
three out of four pretty good Elizabeth
got them all right nice and I'll run and
got them alright Joe Murray got three I
think the first one trick people the
idea of a disturbed sleep doesn't
necessarily mean nightmares so that's
where most people went wrong there cool
let's do sentence completion this is the
last question type let's do a dead
simple one first okay this is one of the
question types that you may receive in
your test sentence completion fine it's
actually pretty straightforward so what
you need to do is finish the sentence
the last word or word it depends on the
instruction here it says choose no more
than one word so we can only have one
word to complete these sentences so the
color of Jay's car is something Jay
sometimes does stand-up something an
easy language Jay teaches something so
please quickly do this I'll give you one
minute to complete whoops
complete these sentences from the
paragraphs
good make sure you spell that one right
pleased to be Rekha good nice and Aruna
make sure you have a capital letter on
that final one or else it will be
considered wrong has to be grammatically
correct including punctuation I still
took your their spelling of your number
the second one there
so I just really
I didn't change the numbers here should
be different numbers cool all right
let's have a look at the answers the
answers are well we know that the color
of J's car is red this is a word taken
directly from the text and that's what
you have to do in the IELTS you don't
create words you take them directly from
the text to complete the sentence
whether it's one word two words three
words etc number eight J sometimes does
stand up what comedy that completes the
sentence correctly because it also
aligns with the paragraph here and
number nine at E language J teaches
English capital E if you do put a
lowercase e it will be considered
incorrect also be careful with singular
and plural nouns for example if the
answer is cars plural with an S and you
wrote car it would be considered
incorrect so be you have to be very
particular with your grammar let's do
some sentence completion ones for real
using real paragraphs let me disappear
I'll give you a few minutes to do these
ones
you
well done looking good
two more minutes
so
Bassel remember this is one word only
please read those instructions at the
top so check your number nine same with
you surrogates you can only write one
word not too so check your number nine
one minute left
you
yes crush Peru I guess you have to
assume what type of resources in the
sentence before it talks about emotions
20 seconds left
cool let's stop there and have a look at
the answers for this one here so answers
number seven
recognising happiness or sadness after a
hard night's sleep may what well here
it's taken from the first sentence and
this is a good point because what
happens in the IELTS reading is that the
questions are sequential so seven will
be located at the top of the paragraph
eight will come next nine will come next
and you read down the paragraph as the
questions descend as well so the answer
here is suffer you could suffer now
eight in order to survive major threats
we are hardwired to recognize emotions
that are considered more what more
primitive we're wired to recognize those
more primitive emotions in order to
survive acute dangers so here the
adjective primitive emotions emotions
that are considered more primitive
that's the answer for number eight
number nine social emotions are less
important for us to recognize as they
don't depend on our survival social
emotions such as happiness and sadness
are less necessary less important for us
to recognize for immediate survival some
people wrote both words immediate
survival and this would be considered
incorrect because if you look at the
instruction it says no more than one
word so in fact you had to choose the
noun their survival number 10 when it
comes to our immediate safety in
well-being we are more likely to
reallocate a mental what a mental
resource
we're more likely to dedicate our
resources reallocate dedicate resources
to blah blah blah blah blah suffer
primitive survival and resources where
the correct answers if you wrote
resource singular it would also be
considered incorrect as well so let's
have a look at the answer shaped your
answer sheet if you got them all right
was number one with c2 was a3 was ng 4 n
g5 t6 f7 suffer 8 premier 9 survival 10
resources please type into the chat what
score you got out of 10 deepak 9 out of
10 nice work milene 8 khushboo 10 great
work
Joe Murray 8 Basile 9 Sarika 8 Donna 6a
runner 8 Quan when who 10 nice cool
alright fine
3 round 5 I'm on sevens no problem oh
cool
thanks for coming along just before you
leave I just want to talk to you quickly
about why you should upgrade your pack
your e to language coms I'm not sure if
we have any paid users of what the ratio
is to free to paid but here's the reason
why
first thing you do when you sign up at
each language comm is you get a
one-on-one study plan this is where you
meet with the teacher and the teacher
writes you a study plan sits you in the
right direction gives you a timetable
tells you exactly what you need to do
areas of weakness areas of strength etc
on the website you'll find methods like
the methods that we saw today not just
for reading or you'll find methods for
listening speaking writing as well as
reading materials heaps of practice
materials for you to practice the
methods on feedback so we give you
written feedback on your writing and
speaking you also as part of the package
that you buy you'll get one-on-one
tutorials with expert teachers there's a
40-minute one on tutorials on zoom'
which is a platform like Skype live
classes we do every Monday Tuesday
Wednesday and
des and more than anything
you get concept motivation until you
pass you also get one you get access
until you pass the test as well up to
one year cool so that's enough from me
let's just do a quick Q&A and then we'll
call it a day you can enjoy your
weekends basile J when will you work on
writing and having some difficulties in
that module Bassel I highly recommend
that you upgrade your account because
we've got dozens and dozens of writing
lessons on both IELTS general and IELTS
academic so do check that out we also
have live classes every Monday Monday
Tuesday and Wednesday on IELTS writing
Coosh Peru I wish I discovered it before
I have my IELTS on the twenty-ninth
kushboo we just have launched an express
package which is I think it's 69 US
dollars and you'll get full access to
the platform including all of the
methods lessons all of the practice
material it's worth doing because it's a
hell of a lot cheaper than having to
take your IELTS again so it's a bit of a
I wouldn't say a guarantee but it
certainly will boost your scores and
hopefully you only have to do this IELTS
once cool any other questions before I
go Deepak how much time should we spend
on the different sections of the reading
section it's too difficult to say
because the passengers will differ from
test to test the rule of thumb is that
you just have to be accurate and
efficient how do you be accurate and
efficient well you need to boost your
vocabulary you need to learn the
question types you need to you need to
learn the method and you need to
practice the methods so that's what it's
all about it's not so much understanding
30 seconds here 40 seconds here it's
about getting it right and doing it
quickly
khushboo I'm finding labeling Maps
difficult so I'm pretty sure we have
something on the website for that couch
group deeper IELTS reading general B of
same level like today's mock test the
question types will be the same but the
passages will be slightly less academic
so I'm inclined to say slightly easier
slightly easier
Donna do you have live listening classes
Nora we don't do live listening classes
but what we do do is we have video
lessons dozens of video lessons on the
website going through all the different
listening question types as well as mock
tests as well aronia I got eight point
five in speaking in IELTS but less in
speaking for Pte how do I correct that's
pretty typical the Pte is very difficult
to get a high speaking score whereas the
IELTS is very difficult to get a high
writing score so I'll run it if you're I
did send an email through hello Andy to
e language calm and we'll take a look at
your report card for PT and give you a
recommendation if you like cool coach
brew I have trouble logging in on the
website I'm in touch with your IT team
let's see hmm
odd not sure what's happening there
Elizabeth I'm having difficult with some
unexpected vocabularies yes you need to
build your vocabulary I am a paid user
increased my initial score from five or
six out of ten to eight or nine out of
ten will it I if you if you practice I'm
almost certain that it will the still
thinks the class it's a burst yes it's a
burst and that'll it's all about cool
I'll leave you guys to it
have an enjoyable Saturday I'll see you
soon do you think about upgrading at e2
language comm see you
you